>>Life is a journey.
We are born.
Our lives are lived.
Then we die.
No one can live forever.
Or can they?
The goal of this film
is to try to understand
the basic fundamental questions,
what happens when we die?
What is the purpose of life?
As we set out to
find the answers,
we began to see that we were
on a journey, an adventure.
Like any journey, we
discovered we were on a path.
To help answer
these questions, we
set out to talk to 12 experts
in the field of energy
and consciousness.
>>Do I, this thing I
know as me right now,
survive physical death?
Meaning all of my memories,
all of my experiences,
all of my friends, all
of the relationships I've
built, the last person I make
love to, will all of that
go with me when I leave?
And so there's two things there.
Either it's lights out.
Or the thing I know
as me continues.
And I don't think the answer
lies in just two things.
>>I use an analogy of a train
ride where all of humanity,
6 and 1/2 billion of
us, are on this train.
And we're all heading to
this unknown destination.
And we're on this
75 year journey.
And think how insane this is.
We're all collectively on
this journey for 75 years.
And we don't have a
clue where we're going.
I mean, would that be acceptable
in any aspect of your life now?
Would you leave the house
and not have a destination?
I mean, we wouldn't accept
that on a day-to-day basis.
But yet we're accepting that
for our entire life journey.
>>I have a feeling that
it's like taking off
old clothes that
don't work anymore,
clothes that don't
fit you any longer.
You just let go of the body.
And what's left is the real
you, your spirit, your soul.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The place where I
would like to begin
was when I was seven years old.
And my father died.
He had a massive heart attack.
And he never came home.
And so that was when
my spiritual journey
began, when I was seven.
And that's at
least 42 years ago.
I wanted to know where he was.
Why did he leave?
And what happened?
So I'd ask a lot of
questions, lot of questions,
to my grandmother, who
was very spiritual.
She would say to me, don't
ask so many questions.
You're going to
make yourself crazy.
But I would ask
questions quietly.
I never felt that
my father was gone.
Everyone else cried
except for myself.
Everyone was crying.
I felt like he was still there.
And he was.
>>My first experience
in really being
able to see where a soul may
go was when my mother died.
My mother and I always had
this psychic connection
even though she
lived in Florida.
And I was up here.
She would play solitaire
at 4:00 in the morning.
And I'd be doing my cards.
We just had this connection.
And right before she became
really ill, I kind of knew it.
She didn't ever want
to know that you
could know these things.
It was too
superstitious for her.
But when she passed,
I wasn't with her.
She was in the South.
She was in the South
having her funeral.
And then she was coming
up for another funeral.
The night that they
burned her ashes,
I didn't know it at
the time, but I dreamt.
And I saw her.
And she was in her
apartment in Florida.
And she was looking
in her apartment.
She went all the
way in the stairs
where you do your laundry,
walked around, walked around.
And then I saw this light.
And the light
overtook all of me.
And it was the
most sweet feeling
I've ever felt in my life,
of sweet, sweet love.
And I didn't know what that was.
It was amazing to me.
So after that time, I started
reading, started reading
Kubler-Ross, and, again,
trying to put things together
to say what just happened.
And that was my first experience
realizing that when you die,
there's this
beautiful thing that
happens, which I didn't know.
She taught me that.
She showed me that.
And that was her gift to me.
>>It's been my experience
that before we transition,
our guides and spirit guides and
whatever else we believe exist
on the other side
begins our preparation.
When I work with people
or I'm around people,
I see very clearly a
white light around people
before they're
ready to transition.
It's happened to me
several times in my life.
I saw it around my grandfather
before he passed away.
And when I had a conversation
with him, he knew what it was.
And he knew it was
his time to go.
And it surprised him
that I could see it.
And I didn't know what
it was at that time.
That was the first time that
that had happened specifically
so close to somebody
transitioning.
It was very, very
clear, the white light
that was around him.
And he died five days later,
passed away five days later.
I've seen it a handful
of times since.
It's mostly around people
who are terminally ill
or are just elderly.
I don't see it around people
before something tragic happens
to them.
But I do see it
around people who
are at the end of
their life spans.
>>Once I went into the
intensive care unit
and I worked more deeply
in the psychic world,
I was able to be around
people who were dying
and see where they went.
And it's very interesting.
Because during this
period of time,
I was pretty much with
everyone who died.
I got assigned to them.
And if I wasn't assigned to
them, the head nurse would say,
would you go help
Mary in room nine?
And that person
was about to die.
So I was meant to
do this for awhile.
This one person that died,
which was really quite amazing,
was a composer.
And it was change of shifts
so the night shift and day
shift were there.
And we happened to be
with him as he was dying.
And they were used
to me by that time.
And I said, OK, everybody,
hold hands around him.
And I heard his soul.
And he became the music that
he played his whole life.
It was amazing.
He became the music.
That's who he was in
his most unified self.
>>When I am sleeping,
often souls come to me.
The soul of my father-in-law,
who passed on some years ago,
came to me in a dream about
six months after he passed.
And it was a
wonderful experience.
Because I missed him terribly,
loved the man dearly.
And he came to tell me that he
understood and that he loved me
and that he was
going on his way.
Often that happens
to me where I get
to confer with someone
who is no longer here.
And they have
something to tell me.
And it's so wonderful
to get those messages.
>>When my father, who
I was very close with,
a wonderful, wonderful
being, had passed away,
and this is around
the time where
I was kind of getting
guided, pushed, and shoved
to move away from anesthesia
and keep going on my journey.
And I was still working.
And I was still trying to
move through this life.
And I didn't know what
was going to happen.
And I was in a great deal
of pain and self-hate,
huge self-hatred, felt
completely worthless.
It was very hard.
And I finally hit what
you would call, I suppose,
a dark night of the soul.
Something just spoke through me.
And I set out in my room.
I spoke out and said,
God, I need help.
I don't think I'm a bad person.
I don't know.
But I can't take this anymore.
And I need help.
And I was crying and
pounding my fists.
And I went to sleep.
And I've dreamt
a lot in my life.
And it's always
like a movie set,
lots of characters,
lots going on.
In this dream, it was
like white screen.
And my dad showed up from
stage left, tie, jacket,
looking very dapper
and quite alive.
And I looked at him.
And I said, Daddy, you're dead.
I said it very quietly.
Because I didn't
want anyone to know.
Because I wanted to
hang out with him.
And he said, I know.
And he called me Booper, which
is what he used to call me.
And I was like, no,
but you're dead.
He goes, I know.
And we hung out.
And I don't really
remember what was said.
I know he held me.
And at the end, I knew
it was time to complete.
And I said, so if things get
really, really bad again,
will you help me?
Can you come to me?
And he said, yeah, sure.
And I work up the next day.
And my entire energy
and mind was shifted.
And the thing that I was facing,
within a day or two, completely
resolved.
>>I did have an experience with
my mother after she passed.
It was a year
after she had died.
And I kept getting
guidance to call my message
machine at home.
And I called.
And my mother's voice was
on my answering machine.
And she just kept
saying my name over.
Well, it was so much out of
my paradigm at that time,
and it totally shocked
me, that I erased it.
And since then, I've
learned that there
are people who claim to have
experiences with contact
of people on the other
side through fax machines,
through computers, through all
kinds of technological devices.
And so that kind of opened
something up for me.
I went, that was
not my imagination.
I don't know what it was.
But I'm just going to hold that
as a little piece to go forward
with.
>>I had, for instance,
an experience
of finding myself, moving
along in this other dimension.
And I say moving.
Was I in my body
or out of my body?
I don't really know.
And it wasn't significant
to me at the time.
But I found myself moving along.
And off to my left,
all of a sudden,
there were these
beings of light.
And they were gathered
around in a circle.
And I almost went right by them.
I was kind of, oh,
well, that's something.
You don't see that every day.
So I thought I'd go
over and investigate.
And so I peeked
over the shoulder
of one of these light people.
And I looked down.
And there was some guy down
there that had obviously
just crossed over
from being dead,
from going through
the process, and now
was on the other
side of something.
I didn't even know where I was.
The closer I looked
though, the more
I realized that that person that
was down there was my father.
Now, my father had
died about seven years
before that of
Alzheimer's disease.
And he had gone through a
process of gradual degradation.
He was a brilliant guy.
And it was really
tough to watch him
lose so much of his essence, to
the point where he didn't even
recognize us anymore
for the most part.
I was with him the
night that he died.
And I whispered to him the
night that he was clearly
passing away.
I said to him, Dad, when
you get to the other side,
will you come back and
tell me what it's like?
And it was just one
of those moments
of a little bit of clarity.
And he looked at me.
And he nodded.
And so I never would have
dreamed that I might actually
be in a position to be welcoming
him over to the other side.
But yet here I was.
I was looking at him.
And I instinctively
picked him up in my arms.
And I started carrying him.
And I was telling him that,
Dad, now you've passed over
and that your family's
going to come and get you.
And it just seem so natural.
And again, I never would
have dreamed that any of this
would be possible.
I couldn't have made
it up if I'd tried.
And after awhile, the
beings of light came.
And they took him away from me.
And they said that
his family is coming.
And he's going to be all right.
And we can care for him now.
And I came out of
that experience
so-- there aren't words to
talk about something like that.
Because you try to tell
somebody about death.
And they weren't there.
And it's just words.
But to me it was so
profound in so many ways.
Because it wrapped
up so much emotion
that I had around his
Alzheimer's and seeing
him pass.
It opened up the possibility
that maybe the range
of experience in
the physical world
is not so separate
from the world beyond
and that maybe we
have capacities
of moving between those
two worlds in ways
that, unfortunately, we
maybe knew at one time.
But we've lost the
capacity to do that.
>>My wife has had actually
many profound out-of-body
experiences.
The day her father died,
she was on the couch.
She was exhausted.
Her mother called
her and told her.
We're in another state.
And to make a long story
short, this is about 2 o'clock
in the morning.
And she lays down.
We had just made a
flight to go back
to Baltimore to
attend the funeral.
She lays down.
The next thing
she knows, she has
this spontaneous
out-of-body experience.
And she finds herself in her
basement of her mother's house.
And there is her father there
with, of all people, my mother.
And her father, who was
very sickly, couldn't walk,
was in very bad shape.
He was dying of cancer.
He literally jumped up
and clicked his heels,
she said, and was showing her
how vibrant and alive he was.
He was proving to her that,
look, don't grieve for me.
I'm feeling great.
And, of course,
out-of-body, people
communicate not by words.
They communicate by
thought transference.
It's just normal communication.
And, of course, he communicated
his love for his daughter.
But most importantly, he
was making it very clear
that he was doing great.
And he was glad to
be where he was.
And my mother and
my wife's father
were basically having a party.
For lack of a better
word, they were
having a party, a
very joyous party.
And so my wife, after
that, she immediately
come back and was
like, oh my God.
But all the fear-based
ideas just were gone.
She was just ecstatic.
It was a confirmation to her
that everything is just not
only good, it's great.
Her concept of death was just
so negative, so restrictive.
There's very few positives in
our culture attached to death.
And here she learned, I
think, a valuable lesson
that it's not a negative event.
It's a very positive event.
It's an uplifting event.
He was free from the pain
of this physical body.
And he was finally
free to enjoy himself.
So to me, I thought it was
quite a remarkable experience.
And I think it must
have been a great lesson
that she needed on some level.
>>My uncle had cancer.
And I offered to send him Reiki.
He lived in Poughkeepsie.
And I lived in Saratoga.
I offered to send
him Reiki every day.
And we agreed on 8
o'clock in the morning.
8 o'clock in the morning, he
sat down in his living room.
I sat down in my Reiki room.
And I sent him Reiki.
He was an engineer.
The stuff didn't particularly
make sense to him.
It was fine.
He liked it.
But he wasn't really
sure much was happening.
But he was willing to sit and
let me send him Reiki every day
at 8 o'clock.
So we met at 8
o'clock in the ethers.
And I sent him Reiki.
This started in August.
In November, I sat down
to send them Reiki.
For three days in a
row, I felt so ecstatic.
I was feeling such euphoria.
I was convinced he was healing.
A few days later,
one of my cousins
called to say that they had
just been to the doctor.
And dad had six months to live.
I was confounded.
But I was so sure some
healing had happened.
And then I remembered.
Healing isn't always physical.
So I thought something
healed for him.
I don't know what.
Then in January, he
was in the hospital.
He was very ill.
And I went to Poughkeepsie.
And I was giving him Reiki in
the ICU, quite late at night.
And he was dosing.
And then he'd wake.
And we'd chat a little bit.
And I felt comfortable
to tell him
what I had experienced
in November.
During this time
when I was feeling
this ecstasy and this euphoria,
I heard his wife's laughter.
She had died three years before.
He adored his wife.
And I was hearing her laughter.
And it was so exciting.
And I told him about this.
And he said, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I knew I was soaking
up something wonderful.
So even though he
said that he didn't
feel Reiki when I sent it
to him from a distance,
at that time something
changed for him.
And he died.
Healing doesn't mean curing.
Healing can be spiritual.
It can be emotional.
It can be psychological.
I don't know what
healed for him.
But something did.
And the gift he gave
me was telling me
he knew something
good had happened.
His daughter and I liked to
talk about our understanding
of metaphysics.
So we would tell him things
that we'd been reading
and what we thought might
happen for him when he passed.
And he listened.
He always was open to listening.
It didn't make sense
to him particularly.
He didn't even tell us
that it didn't make sense.
Three days after
he died, I sat down
to meditate in my Reiki room.
And I closed my eyes.
And it was as if he was
right there in front of me.
It was very real.
He said, I want to tell you,
everything you and Betsy said,
I didn't understand.
It didn't make any sense to me.
But you were right.
And I saw him with
his beloved wife.
They were all dressed up like
they were going to a party.
And they were in the
prime of their life.
They looked beautiful.
They had their arms around
each other's waists.
And they were
spinning in a circle
with their heads thrown back.
And it was a picture
of utter bliss.
What a gift he gave me.
It was very sweet.
So yes, I believe there is
life after death in some form.
Whether it includes bodies
or not, I don't know.
I think I saw their
bodies because that's
how I perceived energy.
That was something that
I would understand.
So it was given to
me in that form.
>>If you can love the memory
of a parent and that helps you
and it gives you solace,
then that's beautiful.
But you are not separate
from that being.
And you do not require
that being in order
to be your true essence
and your true self.
>>No one is ever truly
separate from anyone else.
Isn't that a wonderful
thing to know?
We don't lose anybody.
>>According to a Gallup
poll, approximately 8 million
Americans claim to have had
a near-death experience.
Lindsey Sass, a wife and
mother of two children,
is a woman who had a near-death
experience after she was struck
by lightning on July 19, 1997
in Greenwood Lake, New Jersey.
>>Myself, my ex-husband, and
my niece, all three of us,
were struck at the same
time at my son's swim meet.
Luckily, I landed on the grass.
My husband was on the street.
He landed on his head.
He was screaming in pain.
>>And I saw my niece there.
She was flat out.
I thought she was gone.
>>Over the last 30
years, the United States
has averaged 62 reported
lightning fatalities per year.
>>I had had a heart attack.
The pain was incredible that
was searing across my chest.
And a man had run over to me.
I couldn't move.
I couldn't breathe.
I couldn't talk.
And he said, you were
struck by lightning.
When my senses
started to come back,
I said to him, help me up.
He said, no, no, no.
Lay there.
I couldn't move my right arm.
I had some movement
in my right leg.
I could move it
enough to stand up.
But my right arm,
I couldn't move.
The chest was numb.
A lot of it was very intense.
There was a lightning streak,
like you see in the sky,
up my right arm
where it had entered.
So he lifted me up.
But as a mother would do when
she sees her children may not
have anything, any
love or protection,
your adrenaline starts to pump
as if you could lift a car off
of your child.
There was something very
mysterious going on.
There were so many angels.
There were so many, hundreds of
them that I could comprehend.
And then I went.
And I went into the
car with this woman.
And I turned to her.
And I said, it's OK.
The angels are with us.
I found myself in the car.
The paramedics, who were some
parents on the swim team,
came up and told me
just to rest and relax.
It was very incredible.
After I was struck by
lightning, the veil
between the physical world
and the spiritual world
seemed to have disappeared.
>>A near-death experience
is the sensation
of detachment from
one's body, the presence
of a tunnel of light,
the apparent viewing
of one's own body from on high,
and similar manifestations,
experienced by people
whose heart and brain
have temporarily
ceased to function.
>>The spiritual experience
of the near-death,
in words, because
it's so, so profound.
The English language, or the
language of the human being,
doesn't have the
right vocabulary
to describe it enough.
>>During a near-death
experience,
the physical body
is temporarily dead.
It's often for less than
two or three minutes.
But the heart may stop.
So I just want to
make this clear.
Near-death experience
involves the termination
of the physical body.
>>When you die, you go
into a reality frame
that's not the
same as the dream.
It's not the same as
really the out-of-body.
You go into this reality
frame that was made especially
for people who are just
transitioning from this reality
frame to another, because these
people have special needs.
They're very confused.
>>Everything went black.
I felt myself floating
out of my body.
I felt this tremendous
space of void, of emptiness,
of total nothingness.
>>So you die.
And suddenly, you're
someplace else.
It's like going to
sleep in your bed
and waking up in a foreign
country, in a strange house.
It's that kind of a thing.
So you tend to be a little
stressed and a little confused.
>>As I was floating
out, I saw my father,
who died when I was seven.
I recognized his
smile, his energy.
I felt I knew it was him.
And he guided me
towards the light.
>>And in that reality frame,
you may be met by loved ones.
You may have all
those things going on.
>>I felt myself
floating up and out.
And he was guiding me.
And I saw thousands of lost
spirits, thousands of them.
And I felt totally connected to
them, as if they were family.
I felt their loneliness
and their lostness.
>>A lost soul is the
disembodied spirit
of a dead human who is unable
to function in the spirit world
without help.
>>Many of them either had a
traumatic death experience,
died in battle or
died in an accident
or in a fire or something.
Many of them don't
make it to the light.
Or they feel like they have
unfinished business here.
So they can't quite
allow themselves
to go beyond where
they're stuck.
And sometimes it's a lack of
no one has ever said to them,
there is life after death.
So they don't really
look for anything else.
>>I was feeling the peace.
And it was pulling me up.
I was not lost.
I already had my
spiritual belief systems
before I was struck
by lightning.
>>So if you have a very
strong belief system this way,
that belief system will become
a hook by which they will
manipulate you to get you to
relax and let go and go on.
>>There was a conference.
And we discussed
what was going on.
And they brought my
attention down to my body.
>>You get taken to almost
like group sessions
where things are
explained to you.
They're trying to
tell you something
that makes you feel better,
that lets you relax,
that lets you get the
idea that now you're
aware in this different
reality system.
>>They explained to me, through
energy and thought form,
that it would be very
difficult on my ex-husband, who
was my husband at that
time-- now my ex-husband--
that it would be very difficult
for him if I didn't go back.
I still felt some resistance.
Because there's
no physical pain.
There is no emotional pain.
>>Out there, I
call it out there.
We don't feel the physical
body holding us back.
There's no denseness
of the physical body.
>>I saw my body in
this contorted position
on the ground under
this very large tree,
which attracted the
lightning, and still
was resisting going
back into my body.
And then they brought
my attention again.
And we talked, as I remember
it through thought forms,
about my children,
my three-year-old,
who was in the car alone,
and my 11-year-old,
who was on the dock.
So I came back.
I saw a large vortex,
a tunnel coming down.
And I felt this
tug, like there was
a silver cord to my stomach.
Once I was in that energy
field, I remember thinking,
how fast I am
moving through this.
There was no going back.
So it's still difficult
for me to talk about this.
Because I was home.
That was home.
And the Earth is a place, I have
found, that we come to visit.
>>So it really is whatever is in
your mind, your state of mind,
at the point of leaving
your body is really
going to determine what
happens next for you.
But there is no death really.
I mean, the soul is
an eternal thing.
>>Once you move from what we
might call believing that,
because I read it in a book or
I heard an inspirational speaker
one time or I went
to church every day,
once you go from believing
that to knowing that,
your fear of loss of the
physical body simply vanishes.
>>This body sitting here
is not all there is to me.
I do have a mental body.
It's where all the
thoughts come in.
I have an emotional body
where all the feelings exist.
I have a physical body.
I also have extensions
of myself in other places
and other planes.
We are much more
than we appear to be.
That I know for sure.
>>Once you answer the
question for yourself,
again, I am more
than my physical body
and not say, well,
what is it then?
Are you this?
Just experience for
yourself that very notion,
I am more than my physical body.
Because at a core, heart
level, a knowing level,
I am more than this.
The loss of this means nothing.
>>Lindsey's near-death
experience showed us we are
more than our physical bodies,
which may lead one to believe
that consciousness lives
on and cannot be destroyed.
This gives hope that
there is something more
after we leave
the physical body.
Call it spirit.
Call it soul.
Call it consciousness or energy.
It will continue forever.
>>Everything is made up of
energy, absolutely everything.
>>When we talk about
life after death,
what we're really
talking about is energy.
We're talking about
the energy that we
are that comes
into consciousness
and forms itself into a
being in order to heal.
>>The word "energy" comes up as
a grand explanation in healing,
in an explanation
of the universe.
>>Yes, this is very
slow moving molecules.
None of this is solid.
>>So my experience of my hand
as solid, it isn't really.
It's just my
experience of my hand.
And that's a grand
understanding and a way
in which we can explain it
to ourselves in our heads.
>>Physical form
breaks down to energy.
We're all energy
at a basic level.
So energy doesn't die.
It just simply changes form.
>>People would say, well,
that's life after death.
Well, it's not so
much life after death.
It's just life continuing.
It was just conscious
to begin with.
It's still consciousness
afterwards.
The death thing is
just a point of view.
It's just looking at a
particular data set and rule
set.
So the consciousness
doesn't really
die and get reborn or anything.
The consciousness is continuous.
It just continues on.
It's just now in a
different reality frame.
So you just switch frames.
>>If it's lights out, so what?
It's not like you're
going to be there worrying
that it's lights out.
See?
I told you it's all dark.
There's nothing here.
Because if you're there
thinking about that, well then,
you're still there
thinking about that.
>>When you let go
of this character
that you're playing in
this virtual reality
is that your awareness returns
to a larger reality that's
not as constrained as this one.
>>My kids used to ask me, Daddy,
what is it like when you die?
I mean that,
obviously, is something
that comes up with your children
when they're growing up.
And my answer to
them was, imagine
you're dreaming at night.
And you have a dream life
about you're doing this.
You're running.
And you're playing and
so forth and so on.
And then when you wake up
here in the morning, what
happened to that
person in the dream?
Do you remember
everything that went on?
If time passes, do
you even remember
what the dream was about?
And they would say, no.
Or I remember I was
and uh-- [SIGHS].
Gee, I can't remember now.
It was really a neat dream.
But I just can't
quite remember it.
And I said, well, that's what
dying is going to be like.
>>All the details, they just
kind of melt away like a dream.
So when you wake up
on that other side,
this lifetime, this
experience packet,
starts to fade like a dream.
Now, it's fairly clear at first.
But the further you get away
from it, the dreamier it gets.
And it kind of fades away.
>>But for the most
part, you'll become
involved in wherever you are.
Just like when you
wake up at night
from your nighttime
dreams, you wake up here.
And those things just go away.
And you're into your day.
And that occupies
who and what you are.
>>When you die,
people think, oh, I'll
go meet up with Uncle Fred.
And he and I were buddies.
Well, Uncle Fred's moved on.
After Uncle Fred's been gone for
a pretty short period of time,
all of the details of
this life just go away.
He's not sitting around pining
over things that happened here.
People have a hard time.
They think, well, my children,
my wife, my lover, we
want to go on forever.
Well, it's not like that.
You can have those memories.
They're memories.
They're still there.
It's in your data.
It's not like it's lost.
>>And you might remember a
few really important things
that went on here.
>>The big picture stuff you
did, the things you did right,
and the things you did
wrong, that stuff sticks out.
Because that's stuff to work
on or to get lessons from.
>>But we're standing
inside the system
that we're trying to explain.
So I'm not so sure
that we aren't
trapped by our own
limited observations.
How can we get outside of
this system to explain it?
That's one of the
issues that many people
have with the quantum
mechanical explanation of things
is because we're
inside the system
trying to explain the
system of which we are part.
We, as scientists, cannot be
separate from the experiment
itself.
>>Most people have had
a person in their life
die or know someone
who is grieving
the loss of a loved one.
So how do we go on
after someone dies?
Why does it have to happen?
Is our death preplanned
before we're born?
Is there a life plan?
Maybe death is not an
accident or tragedy
but happens specifically
for certain reasons.
>>The old saying is,
oh, someone died?
There's someone coming in.
I'm just in awe of
how the universe is
able to hold us and create
and destroy and create
and destroy and hold that
with love the whole time.
>>In 2005, there were 2,448,000
deaths in the United States.
In that same year, there
were 4,140,000 births
in the United States.
>>I don't like the word "death."
I don't believe
it exists really.
It's been my experience,
too, that death is final.
And I don't think
anything is final.
Nothing in nature is final.
It just keeps transitioning
into some other form.
>>But it's a continuation,
like the physical world,
in many ways, for most people.
It depends on the
evolution of the person
and how, let's
just say, attached
they are to their
old form-based image.
>>It's a sad thing
to lose somebody.
It's emotional.
It's a tragic thing.
But you have to kind of
step back eventually,
when there's been
enough healing done,
and think about the things
that it has taught you.
There is always a lesson
in something, always.
It's just about digging
deep enough to find it.
Last year, I was diagnosed
with severe blood clots.
And they went to my lungs.
And I was admitted into the
ICU for a period of time.
And it was one of
the worst cases
the doctors had
seen in a long time.
And I was told that I basically
wasn't going to make it.
The only thing I had
going for me was my age.
So when I sat there
and they said to me,
you have 48 hours,
48 or 72 hours.
That's going to be it.
You're either going to make it.
Or you're not.
It was very black and white.
It was a very interesting and
life-changing point for me.
Here I am in the ICU with the
tubes and things attached.
And family coming in and
crying and just very emotional
about it.
But I realized that, at
that particular moment,
I absolutely had to stay
in the present moment.
If I went out of the present
moment into the future,
worrying about my children's
future without me there,
my vibration would lower.
And I would get worse.
My vitals would change.
If I went into the past,
which I did have to do.
I'll be honest with you.
I did have to go into the past.
Because I did have
to come to terms
with my experiences of
life up until that point.
And I made a definite
decision at that point
that I was going to die
consciously, if it was my time.
I was kind of having these
conversations with spirit
at that time where I had
just been to Egypt six months
before that.
And it had become
very clear to me
that part of my life destiny,
my life plan so to speak,
was to bring groups
of people back
to experience these
places around the world.
And so why now,
six months later,
spirit, are you
asking me to leave?
It didn't make any sense to me.
But at that
particular moment what
was most evident at that point,
if it were my time to go,
that it was the experiences
that I remembered.
It wasn't who I've studied.
It wasn't my accomplishments.
It wasn't what I had
done material-wise.
It was what had
I done on a level
where I was present
in my relationships?
It was about, who have I loved?
Who have I
experienced life with?
You shed things that
you have probably
held on to your entire
life when you're
faced with your own death.
I made a promise and a pact
with spirit at that time
that, OK, I'm going to stay.
I was very determined.
And I'm going to stay.
And I'm going to do
what I have to do here.
And that's important
for everybody,
whether you're faced
with death or not.
You wake up every day.
You go to work.
You pay your bills.
You come home.
You watch TV.
You go to sleep.
Is that what you're here for?
Is that what your destiny is?
I don't think so.
I think every single human
being on the face of this earth
has a plan, has a purpose.
And it's divine.
When we lose
somebody tragically,
it's really hard to understand
how that would be a lesson
and how that would
be a good thing.
It's not necessarily that
the event itself is good.
But the lessons that
it takes us through,
we can't experience
necessarily any other way.
>>I think illnesses can be
an opportunity for change,
an opportunity for learning.
They could be challenges
that sometimes
occur because we
haven't listened
to the less extreme signals
that have given us opportunities
for learning the same things.
>>Many times children who
come into this world who
die of cancer in
their childhood,
they often were souls that
volunteered for that so
that the people around them
would learn compassion,
would learn to get
together for a common good.
>>Picking a particular
set of parents
is maybe more complex than we
can comprehend with the brains
we have right here.
But I would say
that that's probably
part of that, of that making
those decisions about who
you're born to and why
you're born that way
and what kind of
experiences you're having.
>>I think that many
times within a family,
when there is a
tragic death, there
is something to be learned
by the other family members.
They learn to value
each other more.
They learn things
about compassion.
about forgiveness
that they couldn't
learn any other way.
It's the hard lessons
that we often learn.
We learn best by
stumbling and falling.
the painful things
that we go through, not by the
sunny days and the flowers.
>>Maybe there is a lesson in
everything we experience here.
The experiences may be
our opportunity to grow,
which sometimes means death.
Death may be the best
teacher in our life.
The idea of soul
contracts may be a new way
to look at death as our
ally rather than our enemy.
>>I read a book years ago by
Neale Donald Walsch called
"The Little Soul and the Sun."
And it's about a little soul
that's up in heaven with God
and wants to come
to Earth and wants
to experience forgiveness.
And another little
soul says, I love
you enough to go
to Earth with you
and give you this experience.
So I will have to take on
darkness and heaviness.
And I will not
remember who I am.
But I will give you
something to forgive.
In that instant, I healed.
I recognized the truth in
that, that the people who
may be the most
difficult in my life
have been willing to
take on this heaviness
so that I can learn.
What a gift.
>>Groups of souls, soul
families so to speak-- they
call them monads-- often
incarnate in groups
to help each other.
They sit down.
And they plan out the life
that they need this next time.
Let's say they need
to learn compassion.
So their fellow souls
in their soul family
say, you know what, I'll
volunteer to be your Mom.
Because I have to learn
something about mothering.
And another one
says, I'll volunteer
to be your best friend.
And I'll betray you.
They volunteer to
do various roles
in this play of this next life
that you're going to live.
They're all going
to get something
from it, some learning.
And so are you.
>>Certain soul
group members take
on that role of going
through certain things.
Because remember,
when you transition,
your energy, regardless
of how it happened,
you go back to your source.
And you start again.
And the ones that
are left behind
are the ones processing
that lesson, perhaps
to a bit more extreme.
>>We learn by not only
learning through our actions.
We learn by being.
We learn by becoming that
which we wish to learn.
And it sounds bizarre.
But it's so effective.
That's the only way
you know something
is to experience it, to be it.
>>And all of those
various roles that we play
teach us something about
the human experience,
about the soul experience.
And we kind of have to
play all those roles
to reach the point
of enlightenment.
>>I think our soul is
reveling in the opportunity
to try on different suits
of clothes, if you will,
different bodies,
different experiences.
And it's all in its
journey back to wholeness,
back to being complete.
>>We have to know what
it's like to be a murderer,
to be murdered, to be hated, to
be loved, to be compassionate.
A complete and total
awareness that we're all one,
that there is no
separation, that you
can love the poor soul
that's in the gutter,
the drunk, that you
can love the murderer.
You can love every one
just as if they were you.
That, to me, is the
ultimate in enlightenment.
>>So we make the soul
contract as a spirit.
Then, we come in through
the act of conception.
We dream our life in the womb.
And when we come out into the
physical plane, we manifest it.
>>On average, 3,000 people
commit suicide every day,
the global mortality rate of
one completed suicide every 30
seconds.
One of the most perplexing and
difficult deaths to deal with
is death by suicide.
It is difficult for
those left behind
to put the pieces together, to
figure out why this happened.
>>Suicide's a bad idea because
you're leaving opportunity
behind.
You don't pass go.
You don't collect $200.
You just start over.
And that's a waste of
your time and effort.
It's a very traumatic way to go.
When you go to
suicide, you're usually
a very traumatized,
self-focused.
Because before you
get to that point,
you have to be very
self-focused to get there.
Now, I'm not talking
about somebody
who's about to die with a
terrible, painful disease.
And they want to
end it a month early
because it's very expensive.
And it's just torture for them.
Or they're drugged up.
That's different.
I'm talking about a
suicide where somebody just
gets fed up with
life or whatever.
And they want to end it all.
Very bad idea.
You're so traumatized.
You're so self-focused
when you get to that point
that it makes your
transition very difficult.
It damages your psyche,
your consciousness
to some degree in that
it makes it easier
for you to do that
again the next time.
>>So it can get
into a cycle where
people get to a tough
spot, suicide's the answer
because they've done
that two or three times
already in various lifetimes.
So it's not a trend you
want to start to begin with.
Secondly, it wastes
the time you have here.
You've already spent 20 or 30
years, or at least 15 or 16
years, getting through
the stuff phase.
>>It takes you probably 30 or
40 years to get to the point
that you've worked
through all the stuff
that you have to work through
to where you really start asking
big picture questions, to
where the quality of your being
and your life start to
make a difference to you.
When you're 25
years old, you don't
think about the
quality of your being.
You think about the weekend
and where you're going to go
and the fun you're going to
have and your relationships.
And you're so filled with
living this physical life
that the bigger dimensions to it
generally aren't much in focus.
So you have to go through
maybe 30, sometimes 40, years
before you really
start to care about,
what's the significance of me?
What am I doing here?
Why am I turning this crank?
What's the bigger purpose?
And those questions
start to bubble up.
Well, that's not
the time to leave.
That's just the
time to get to work.
>>Each suicide
intimately affects
at least six other people.
>>We grow through drama.
Call it good, bad,
or indifferent.
We create drama for training,
for learning purposes.
It's even the purpose for wars.
People learn through
drama, through conflict.
That's just the state of
consciousness we're in.
>>And the Earth is a
place, I have found,
that we come to visit.
No one stays here.
No matter how
attached a person is,
this is a school where
we come to learn lessons.
>>It's a decision to come
into the physical plane.
It really is a
decision to come here.
This is a schoolhouse.
We're here to learn something.
We're here to evolve our spirit
through certain experiences,
through certain lessons
that we've learned.
>>There's something that's
built into this world that
is kind of unique, I
think, in many ways.
We live in a world
of contrasts, meaning
there's dark and light, male
and female, and big and little,
up and down.
And those contrasts, in some
ways, can be sort of painful.
Because some of that feels good.
And some of it doesn't.
But I think all of
that works together
in a way that sort of crafts our
soul in ways that we might not
be able to do in different
types of environments.
>>You have to grow up.
You have to lower the entry
of your consciousness.
You have to evolve.
If you're here and until
you evolve to the next step,
you're still here.
And until you evolve to the
next step, you're still here.
So just dying doesn't change
a whole lot other than
put you in a different reality.
Let you plan the next thing.
Then you go on.
So it's not really the
big, oh, after I die,
I'm going to go meet Gabriel
and do this and do that.
And you have all of
these expectations.
And I'll know everything.
All the secrets will
be revealed to me.
It isn't like that.
There's no free lunch.
You don't grow up just
because you want to,
just because you
think it would be nice
or just because you've
switched reality frames.
>>Some say, before
enlightenment,
chop wood, carry water.
After enlightenment,
Well, you do your job.
You live your life.
You serve the purpose
that you're here to serve.
And you do it selflessly.
You do it lovingly.
You enjoy it.
We're not here to suffer.
There is a beautiful
mantra, Om Namah Shivaya.
Nothing is mine.
Everything is thine.
Everything is here for
me to use and enjoy
but not to possess
nor be possessed by.
So we are here,
Om Namah Shivaya,
to live this beautiful place
we've all manifest into.
How lucky are we?
And how lucky are we to
have people in our lives
to love and to care with?
>>It really all comes
back to being about love.
Everything is based in love.
And we separate
ourselves from it.
Our ego's job is to kind
of keep us separate.
As I'm trying to come
to the understanding
that I'm really not
separate, the ego's
apt to freak out, give
me all kinds of reasons
to believe that I'm separate.
Well, look at this.
Look at that.
Of course you're separate.
You're separate.
You're unique.
You're distinct, whatever.
And my soul is striving through
all of this to reach oneness.
My ego is having the
opportunity to morph,
to take on a different job.
I've asked my ego
if it wouldn't like
to help me to remember
that I'm part of the whole
rather than needing
to be separate.
>>What is it that you believe?
What were you taught
as a young child
about what happens when you die?
Do you still carry
those same beliefs?
Or have they changed?
Many people rely on
religion or beliefs
to help understand where
the soul goes when it dies.
Many of us hold
onto those beliefs.
However, can these
beliefs sometimes
limit us from exploring
other possibilities
as to what happens when we die?
>>Seminary was a
process of dismantling
a lot of my beliefs.
Before I went to seminary, I had
my beliefs pretty well in mind.
I usually say that my
story begins in many ways
when I fell off of the roof
of an underground house.
This was back in the 1970s.
And my brother and I had
a construction company.
And this was the
first energy crisis.
And so people were exploring
all kinds of different ways
to save energy in building
and in cars and whatnot.
So my brother and I thought
that underground houses
were the wave of the future.
And one day we were
building a home.
They're made out of concrete.
And I was up on top of the roof.
And we had just poured
the concrete roof.
And I was pulling
on a form board.
And all of a
sudden, it gave way.
And I found myself
falling off of the roof.
And I didn't even have any
time to adjust to the fall.
And I slammed into
a pile of gravel.
And I didn't know
it at the time.
But I ended up
fracturing my hip.
They put me in physical therapy.
And I found out that, when
I was in physical therapy,
that I was in
extraordinary pain.
And so the doctor
came by one day.
And he looked at me and
said, you're really hurting,
aren't you?
And I said, yeah.
And he said, well, let's take
some more x-rays of that hip.
And so when they did,
taking at an oblique angle,
they did find that there
was a fracture there.
The doctor comes
in and says, I'm
going to be off
work for six weeks
and that I would be in traction.
And so I went into this
spiral of pain and anxiety
at that time, pain because the
hip was pretty excruciating.
So I just kind of went
spiraling downward.
And all of a sudden,
I popped through
into an entirely
different reality.
And in this reality, all of
the pain that I had in my hip
completely disappeared.
The anxiety evaporated.
I found myself surrounded
by complete peace.
After awhile, I
was also standing
in front of this being of light.
And we were conversing
about my life without words.
And I came out of that
experience so stunned.
Because I had no idea
that another reality like
that even existed,
much less the idea
that you might be
able to experience it.
Well, I had been
wrestling with an issue of
whether or not I
should go to seminary.
Because I really felt
a call to the ministry.
And, of course, my
immediate reaction
was, well, this is
the voice of God.
And I need to go into seminary.
So I took my wife and, at
that time, two children.
And we went to Princeton
Theological Seminary.
And I went through the
three years of training
to get my Master's Degree
there and then became
a Presbyterian pastor.
But as the years
went on, I began
to realize that the real
purpose of that experience
was to give me a
taste of something
and to create a hunger for
something that I knew that
deep down in my bones
that I had to understand
and to explore more fully.
That hunger was so intense.
It was even more intensified
as I went into the ministry
because there weren't a lot
of people who were speaking
about that kind of thing,
at least in my church.
And so I found myself in this
state of tension, if you will,
between where I
really wanted to go
and what I really
wanted to explore
and the appearances
that I had to keep up
in my role as a pastor.
I went into what was then
called the world's largest
bookstore in Toronto, Canada.
And when you go into
this place, there
are books just as far
as the eye can see.
I mean, literally
millions of books.
I wasn't in there
but two minutes
when, all of a sudden, one
book jumped off the shelf.
And it was Bob Monroe's
second book, "Far Journeys."
When I started
reading that thing,
I simply couldn't
put the thing down.
It was so stunning to me.
Here, for the first
time, was somebody
who was talking in
a contemporary sense
about the experience I had
when I fell off the roof.
12 years after I read that
book, I had my first opportunity
to come to the Monroe Institute
and go through the program
here, in the Gateway Voyage.
And to my utter
amazement, that world
that I experienced when
I fell off the roof
opened up in space
all over again,
which was both gift and curse.
Because on the one hand, it
was a rediscovery of something
that was so dear and so
wonderful and powerful for me.
On the other hand, it
only increased the tension
with my role as a pastor.
I left the church and the
pastorate in the year 2000.
But two months after I walked
out of the door of the church,
I got a call from
the Institute here
asking me if I would like to
become a residential trainer.
But the real force
that has had an impact
has been this kind
of work, this kind
of exploration of
altered perceptions,
the metaphysical world.
And again, for me, the
most compelling component
of all that is the
experiential domain.
>>Religion is a viable way to
grow but without the dogma,
without the creeds, without
the arrogance, without the,
I'm right.
You're wrong, that
sort of thing.
And I think a lot
of people who are
truly spiritual and
religious, they see that.
They see value in
the words of Buddha.
They see value in the
words of the Dalai Lama.
They can see that
these things are all
headed in the same direction.
They're talking about
love, peace, giving.
They're not into the, I'm right.
You're wrong.
If they are, then they're
just not very evolved.
And they're not very spiritual.
No matter how religious
they claim to be,
they're doing something else.
They're feeding their
ego, feeling superior
because they're right.
And everybody else is wrong.
Well, feeling superior's
not on your way to success.
>>There's a difference between
being religious and being
spiritual.
Being religious, you
have a certain set
of ideologies and belief
systems that you absolutely
don't go beyond.
And most of the time, being
religious means, in a sense,
that you judge other people for
not believing the same thing.
I disagree with that
aspect of religion.
>>Obviously, we can
go around the world
today and see all
sorts of people wanting
to kill each other
over religion.
Where's the
spirituality in that?
Well, there isn't any.
So religion and spirituality
are two different things.
They can travel together.
They can travel separately.
Religion can be anti-spiritual.
It can take you in the
opposite direction.
And it does that, if your
religion is basically
your dogma, your belief system.
That sort of stuff has no value.
It has negative value.
>>If you examine the profound
spiritual experiences
of all cultures, you will
find that the common element
in all religious
text is that someone
went beyond their
physical limits.
Someone had the courage
and the foresight
to reach out and
spread their wings
and explore beyond the narrow
limits of their physical body.
That's what made the difference
between a great spiritual
leader and those that are just
want to bes, that are just
parrots repeating someone
else's written word.
>>What their true
teaching is, not
what maybe we pulled
out of it in order
to have power or
control or out of fear.
I don't believe that any
of these great beings,
these great sages, were saying
anything other than, go within.
Be the love that you are.
Realize it within every being.
And treat everyone that way.
And it will be brought to you.
>>Religion is a way
that you can grow.
It's not like being
religious is a false path.
That's a path that's called
the path of surrender
where you give yourself
up to the larger thing.
That's kind of the
religious path.
A lot of Eastern religions
are on a path of surrender.
All aren't.
Some are.
That, though, has
nothing to do with dogma.
Dogma is a different
kind of thing.
Dogma is a bunch
of belief systems.
It's ritual and other things.
And there's very
little value in dogma.
So the religious path,
the path of surrender,
is a valid way of growing
but only in as much as you're
thinking in the big picture.
It's about love.
It's about others.
It's about service.
It's about growing up.
It's about who you are inside.
It's not about raise
your right hand
and swear that you
believe these things.
You don't get any credit
for believing anything.
It's not about belief.
It's about who you are.
>>For me, there's
a big difference
between belief and experience.
Belief is something that you
construct maybe independent
of experience or maybe you take
the experiences of your life
and you try to put them together
in some kind of logical way.
And then that becomes a belief
that you hold pretty dearly.
And it's sometimes
very difficult
to give those beliefs up.
Because we're very,
very attached to them.
But when you begin
to actually move
into these other ranges of
perception, when you begin
to move into other
ranges of experience,
it's a different category
of knowing than belief.
Belief is largely
about speculation.
I think maybe it's like this.
But when you move
into experience,
then that becomes a part
of your sense of knowing.
>>We all come in with certain
frameworks of beliefs.
And sometimes those
can act as boxes,
which are limitations for us.
And when we can have these
personal experiences, then
somehow there's a
new crack in the box.
Or the lid's lifted
a little bit.
And then we start to expand and
open up to new possibilities.
>>Most of us have bought into
a belief system at a young age.
We have been spoon-fed.
And it doesn't
matter what it is.
But we've all been spoon-fed
some kind of religious belief
system.
And most people accept
what they're given.
>>Belief is a trap.
Anything that you
believe is a trap.
If you are interested
in an area,
don't believe
something about it.
Go find out about it.
Go do it and experience it.
Find out.
>>So the courage comes in
being your own scientist.
>>We have the capability
to obtain the answers
for ourselves.
We don't have to be dependent
upon belief systems.
We don't have to be
dependent on the concepts
and theories of others.
We have the ability to become
explorers ourselves and obtain
the answers to
the big questions.
Where do we come from?
What's our purpose?
Where are we going?
Why are we here?
I mean, these are
the big questions.
>>If I had to leave a parting
word with everybody, I'd say,
start going.
This is your opportunity.
You have opportunities
to grow every single day.
You don't have to go
out and find them.
You don't have to take
a training course.
You don't have to read a book.
You don't have to
go find a group.
You don't have to do
any of that stuff.
Opportunities are in front
of your face every day.
You just have to take them.
>>As a final message, it'd
be nice to be original.
Would it be plagiarizing
to quote Bob Monroe?
Would it be plagiarizing to
say what Bob Monroe said?
"The only way to know is
to find out for yourself."
You can read about this.
You can talk to other people.
You can watch videos.
You can go to lectures.
But the only way you're
really going to know
is to find out for yourself.
>>You got to get
there on your own.
And don't say, well,
I don't know how.
How do I go?
I need to do something.
All you have to do is make
each choice a better one
in your interaction
with other people.
Make each choice come
from love and caring
about them and not about you.
That'll be a hard
enough challenge.
>>And it's up to us to do it.
We have to devote the time
and the energy to do it.
We have to go beyond
just being the pawn.
We have to get to the point
where we make a decision like,
I am not going to be the pawn
of anybody else's philosophy.
And I'm not just
referring to religions.
I'm talking about political
too, all aspects of our life.
I'm going to be a free thinker.
I am going to be an explorer.
I am going to find out
the answers for myself.
I'm no longer going to be
dependent on this crap I've
been fed from childhood.
That is a critical point in the
development of each individual.
This is where the path begins.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Secret of the
universe is to grow up.